---
slug: getting-started-at-a-new-company-tips-and-tricks
date: '2020-02-26'
title: 'Tips and Tricks - Starting a new [Thing]'

coverImage: '/assets/blog/undraw_share_opinion.png'
---

Hi there! As I mentioned in my
[last post that I was changing jobs](https://jnielson.com/jnielson-is-changing-jobs),
I've recently had the pleasure of starting in on some new projects at a new job.
It's been a rollercoaster trying to absorb as much information as possible while
also trying to contribute to the forward progress of the company and the
projects that I get to work on. It's really easy when starting on a new [Thing],
be that a project, employment opportunity, or something entirely different, to
be discouraged and overwhelmed at the sheer amount of imnformation you need to
gather. In this post I'll outline some of the thoughts I've had as I have dove
head first into my new job where I've worked on a major project and at least 3
smaller projects in my first two weeks.

## The high-level thoughts:

find **someone** you can ask all your questions to

Don't be afraid to **clarify processes**

Put up half-finished work to **get feedback**

See if you can setup some **regular pair programming**

Find something you can do during work to **connect with people**

## Let's dive in!

The first thing I've appreciated with this new employment opportunity has been
the focus on helping me become familiar with the projects and productive as
quickly as possible. It's not fun to sit for a couple hours not knowing how to
move forward on a large project, since even the smallest task can be daunting in
a large codebase. The major project I'm working on has had a few devs working on
it for a while now, which means that it's super quick for them to do the small
task I was assigned... but if they do it I can't learn nearly as well! So, I'm
grateful that my company has a structure where there's a lead developer (lead
dev) who has it as a part of their job description to directly support other
developers, especially the new ones. Sometimes this means that the lead dev
spends way more time supporting that new person on a task then it would take for
them to do it. A quick example...

![Dropdown Search Field Example](/assets/blog/tips-and-tricks-new-thing/dropdown-search-field-example.png)
_This screenshot is actually from
[a w3schools example](https://www.w3schools.com/howto/howto_js_filter_dropdown.asp)
since I was working on an internal project_

### Tale of the dropdown search field

One of the first small tasks I worked on was updating a dropdown search field to
automatically focus the search box when it is opened. While my lead dev could
have finished this task in probably 30 seconds, he assigned it to me knowing it
would take me way longer than that to finish. As is pretty typical when working
on a project for the first while, it can take a good amount of extra time to
track down where things are happening and how to adjust existing code (that was
written by someone else) to accomplish the task at hand. So, in this example I
poked around on the running site (locally) to figure out where the code for this
dropdown search field lived... and eventually found it. While I could have asked
my lead what file to make the change in, I've found it super helpful since then
to have spent some time digging around in the project, as it built up some
context on where the various pieces are coming from and how they fit together.

## Things I've done

Now let's focus on some things that I've tried to do as "the new person" to have
more fun and be more useful and productive! The first, and in my opinion, most
important is I've tried to find a fun way to **be involved and connect with the
people** at work. Connecting with people has a number of benefits, like making
it more enjoyable to be at work even if work things are hard. The way that I've
found most fun to connect with the people in my office has been **foosball**!
It's fantastic, especially since there was already a decently active group
before I started making it easier to jump in and meet people. I've also tried to
be involved in the smaller lunch group that hangs around the office and chills.
Today a part of that group played Super Smash Bros, which I joined and had a
blast! Basically, find things to do with people, in my case one on one or in
small groups to get to know them.

## Looping back to the list

Of the high-level thoughts I listed above I've really only talked about the
first and last ones. The middle ones are a bit harder at least for me since they
involve leaving my comfort zone and admitting that I don't know everything.

For example, on my first day I was told what the basic outline of the dev
process was and that it applied to most projects. A few days later, I was
working on a project doing what I thought was the process and trying to follow
my advice of opening a PR early with half-finished work, and then noticed... the
PR from another person that was up was to an **entirely different branch**! So,
I quickly reached out to my lead dev sharing the process that I thought I was
following and asked if it applied to this project. He responded promptly
(thankfully) and filled in the gaps, since this particular project has a
stricter process than most of the other ones at the company due to a large
upcoming release that I was helping with. This experience helped me realize how
important it is to clarify things, especially when jumping between different
projects.

One of my favorite things about this position has been the scheduled, monday
through thursday, hour long pair programming block with my lead dev. It's super
useful! It's a time that I can ask pretty much any question (related to work)
that I've run into since the last one, if I didn't get to catch him more
quickly. It's also a time where I know I have their full attention, since they
don't even bring their laptop in. This time has also been critical in orienting
myself with the various tasks I've worked on in these first two weeks, helping
me to make progress faster by leaning on his experience with the codebase.

## What do you do?

These are some of the things that I've noticed have helped a ton during these
first two weeks at my new job. I'd love to hear about what you've done! Feel
free to reach out on twitter (link below)!

_Banner image courtesy of undraw.co_
